# Capstone
Taking real world evidence from healthcare to categorize patient presentation and predict the likelihood of readmission. The data used for this project was sourced from Kaggle and represents patient encounters across 130 US hospitals over the span of ten years. The patients are all diabetes patients. The dataset has over 50 features including demographic, diagnostic, hospital utilization metrics (i.e. days in emergency), and medication. We leverage this data to try risk stratefy patients and ultimately predict their likelyhood of readmission withing 30days following discharge. This endeavor can be broken up into four parts: data cleaning, data preparation, patient clustering, and prediction base modeling.

There were many things that needed to be addressed before the data could be made ready for analysis. Features that contained diagnoses codes (ICD-9-CM) had to be mapped to online databases to define their respective diagnoses and make facilitate future interpretation. There features that contained a great deal of missing values: A1C, and Max Glucose. These were unfortunate as these are common indicators of diabetic regulation. Weight was removed form the dataset for similar reasons. Additional feaures that held no bearing on patient stratification and outcome were also removed: Medical Specialty, and Payer Code. After the diagnoses codes were mapped to their "Broad Category" (a decision that was made to minimize feature count), three additional features had to be mapped against a dictionary to define the respective categorical values. The three features were admission source, admission type, and discharge disposition. Finally, numerical features were assessed for normality, and 'Age' was found to have outliers (patients <20 years old).

After the data was cleaned, it was time to prepare the dataset for analysis. There are two features that made this project somewhat challenging: 'encounter id' and 'patient number'. The challenge presented in that while every encounter was unique, there were many patients that presented with multipled encounters. Treating each encounter as an observation would skew the data and greatly compromise any predictive ability we hoped to gain. To address this, we took a subset of the data that was solely comprised of the first encounter for each patient. This was meant to be used for our clustering and prediction efforts later on. After splitting the data into 'First Encounters', we removed any identifying features (i.e. patient number, encounter id), generated dummy variables for our categorical features, and applied scaling to the data. Once prepared, we were ready to move on to the clustering analysis. 

Reducing dimensionallity is a key practice. To do this, we implemented PCA to assign importance loadings to our features and assign the top 10 to be included in our analysis. We clustered against these top 10 features and applied three seperate clustering methodologies: KMeans, DBSCAN, and Gaussian Mixture. Ploting inertia against the number of cluster, our elbow graph gave us an optimal cluster count of 4. After running each of the three clustering models and plotting them against each other, the result was not as intuitive as was hoped. The observations were very closely scattered and seemed to follow an odd organized distribution with clean straight extremes. The borders between the different clusters was not clear either. In an attempt to better interpret the results of the clustering, a Silhoutte Score was applied to each of the models. The aim is to have a score of great than 1. Gaussian Mix's performance was abismal, in the negatives. The best model, KMeans was in the low 0.3s. This indicated that the model did a poor job of defining boundaries between the clusters and resulted in overlapping clusters. The conclusion drawn is that, with the data given, it is near impossible to define clearly stratified patient clusters. The next iteration in this project will be to assess clustering performance solely on demographics and comorbidities while excluding all treatemnts, medications, and hospital resource utilization featurs. 

After the clustering efforts, we move on to the classification base model development. Here, we attempt to classify patients as Yes or No, where Yes applies to a patient being readmitted within 30days, and No is eithe not readmitted or readmitted after 30days. The first encounter data was split into test and train data and the features were scaled to allow for modeling. A logistic regression model was trained and tested. Using metrics functions from Sklearn library, a classification report was generated along with a confusion matrix and an ROC/AUC score. These were chose to see how precise the model was on predicting both "yes" and "no", and identifying how many false positives/negatives it generated. At first glance, it had a high precision of .91 when predicting "no" on readmission <30days. However, it scored a .57 for predcting "yes" on readmission <30days, meaning the model performs slightly better than a 50/50 random guess. The confusion matrix showed 11K instances of correctly predicting 'No' with only 3 false negatives, but only 4 instances of correctly predicint 'Yes' with over 1K false positives. This may be likely to the larger number of "No" readmissions <30days skewing the training. The model sees 'No' far more often and instead of learning or picking up on variance signals to predict, is opting for the more likely outcome. 

The next steps for this project will be to better balance the dataset and assess any impact it may have on the base model. The subsequent step will be to apply additonal models to assess their predictive ability (Random Forest Classifier, SVM).  
